Anyway, congratulations, Professor.
I'd like to start just talking in general about the art, the craft translation.
Let's enter it this way.
Do you believe that every generation...
requires, say, its own Homer, its own Dante, its own Shakespeare.
I don't think there's any question of that.
Our notion of poetry is always changing.
Our notion of Homer is always changing.
Our notion of what constitutes English poetry is always changing.
But I think there's another side to that, too.
Every generation needs its own translation because they're looking for the timely translation.
At the same time, as you well know, there's much about Homer that is timeless.
And so much as you want to be relevant, with it, current to your own idiom, there's another aspiration too, I think, and that's to catch by contagion some of Homer's timelessness.
And there's always a great example behind you.
Pope's Homer, Dryden's Virgil, Golding's Auburn, which were the great translations for their day, for their generation.
At the same time, they were works of writing in their own right, and they lasted a good long time.
We can anticipate the question.
Well, Pope's Homer was Homer in England, not only for his generation, but for many generations along.
And he still read for much the same reason.
Because it became a work in its own right.
Precisely.
So it's a kind of combination of timeliness and timelessness, I think, which you're really after as a translator.
Especially when you're dealing with one of these people like Homer or Espinosa or Sophocles, who have lingered for very good reasons.
They've endured for a good long time.
So say that, but on the other hand, you don't want...
your translation to be perceived as something that's dated to a particular time?
Not at all.
No.
You would hope and want it to be read 50 years, 100 years from now?
You would want to.
You would, of course, want that.
Yes, you would.
It's an immodest code and probably an impossible one.
But I think that any translator in the business entertains that, huh?
Especially when they're dealing with one of these giants.
who in the case of Homer has been around for 2,700 years.
You're always brought up against the question, why has he lasted so long?
And if he's lasted so long, can I create something in English which will not last 2,700 years, but last maybe a little longer than my generation?
It is linked English with language.
Is English a good language for Homer to go into?
I think so.
It's the only one I've got.
Well, I'm just wondering, you know, what he's like in Italian or Russian or... He sort of said, for instance, that Shakespeare plays very well into Russian.
I don't know why that is, but... The Russians think he's better in Russian than in English.
Here we are.
I was reading the great Italian Iliad by Monte, and it's got some marvelous things in it, I think.
But to answer your question, yes, I think there's a kind of easy flow of Homer into English, recognizing at the same time that Homer has a highly inflected language and we don't, that Homer lends himself to hexameters and we lend ourselves more to iambics.
So there are really cultural differences between the two languages.
I think, in fact...
One of the interesting parts of translation is the way you can stretch your own language by virtue of coming into contact with something as enormous as Homer.
It's not only that you want to bring him into your own idiom, you want him to stretch your own idiom at the same time.
I think these things are always two-way streets.
I read something that you had no way meant to do a line-by-line translation.
No.
You might just...
Talk about your philosophy, your attitude on that.
Well, it's a curious combination, I think, of trying to get over into one's English line as much of what Homer says as possible, at the same time creating an English line.
And the two are not necessarily perfect fits.
There are times when a line in Homer will come right over into a line in English.
Other times when you can even find your English briefer than Homer.
Other times when you have to expand a little.
So the...
The idea or even tyranny of a line-by-line translation becomes a kind of straight checker, I think.
It cuts down too much on the pliancy of your own native language.
It forces Homer into too rigid a mold in your own native language.
It would almost be like doing Dante and Tessarima, I think.
You're exposing that on yourself, which I guess... Yes.
And these disciplines are good and healthy, at the same time they can be terrifically frustrating.
I mean, it worked well in Italian, but it's always laughable when you try to... At times, depending on the skill of the translator.
Robert Pinsky did a marvelous Inferno in a kind of off Terzorima that works very well, but he's not imitating Dante's Terzorima exactly.
Do you study other, the work of other translators?
I mean, more or less as a carpenter might, you know, like a carpenter.
And I try not to look at other translations until I have a version of my own.
And that means the 20th, the 30th draft of the same passage.
Really?
Yeah.
Each individual passage?
It takes that many.
I'm an inveterate tinkerer, and the computer gadgetry...
makes tinkering, as you must know.
Oh, I live by it.
I love it.
Yeah.
Easy and irresistible.
So, yes, I always was an inveterate tinkerer, but in a manuscript as long as the Iliad and the Odyssey, hard on the hands.
Did you do this translation on the computer?
I did.
Wow.
Oh, I can do something with that.
That's great.
Well.
I love that.
Let's just get in the rough sludge out.
And the real joy is when I'm working a hard copy with a pencil.
So the first few might be on the computer.
You do a printout.
That's right.
I find the computer wonderful in that regard because it sort of limbers you, loosens you.
The speed and delivery is so great.
And the way you can, it's so forgiving too, isn't it?
Nice.
It's absolutely forgiving.
You can go back and quietly make corrections that nobody will ever know.
But isn't it paradoxical in a way that you have this 2,700 year old pair of epic poems?
given a new life or an extended life to a reason.
It is remarkable.
It does give one pause, doesn't it?
It gives one pause, and you can bet your bottom daughter that if Homer had that technology, he would have used it too.
Do you see him as a person in your mind's eye?
I can't help but see him as a person, as one person, in fact.
And he is one.
And he wrote poems as well?
That's how it feels to me.
I think that's because I'm an impurable romantic.
What I mean by that is that I'm committed to Keats' notion of the great writer, the Shakespeare... Is that picking me up at all?
Yeah, sure it is.
Yeah, that's better.
Keats said of Shakespeare that his mind was a thoroughfare.
He could imagine equally an Imogene from Cymbeline and an Iago.
the personification of evil.
In other words, all experience came into his ken.
And I think the span from Miliad to Odyssey is something like all of experience.
And that's why I'm committed to a single Homer.
I think even if there weren't a single Homer, it becomes a necessity for the translator, who's working on both poems, to maintain some kind of consistency of voice while moving from the world of war to the world of peace.
Now, you did them...
nearly at first, and then the Odyssey?
Was this because nearly that's the way they appear, do you think?
It's hard for me to answer.
I think the best answer I can give you is that I had worked for many years in Greek tragedy.
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and the great tragic prototype, really, is Achilles in the Iliad.
And one of the reasons why I went to Homer at all was that
work back to the source.
And the source of Greek tragedy seemed to me to be profoundly the Iliad.
I think that's why I worked so... I went to it first.
And there were... Another more personal reason is that Robert Fitzgerald was a good friend of mine.
And I admire his work very much.
And I've always been captivated by his translation of the Odyssey.
And I felt that if I were to try Homer, I might, if I went back to Delia, have a little more room to maneuver.
It felt easier, better, more natural to do that.
Now, where you respect Fitzgerald and his work, do you see these...
I mean, a real serious reader, reading both of them, all of them.
And is there something to be gained from reading all of these?
I think there's something to be gained from every translation.
I mean, I think that you ignore these things at your peril.
Every translator has a different way of going up the great original.
And if you can put them all together, you may come out with Homer.
Yeah.
as a contemporary writer.
You can go ahead a hundred years or back to a hundred years.
You're really writing about your own time.
Do you feel that's the case when you're translating this class?
Very much.
Are you inevitably bringing in your own time, a world view, I guess?
I think it's inescapable.
It's all the conditions, the language that you and I are speaking, the English that you and I are speaking.
It's a function of what we read.
It's a function of what we hear.
It's a function of what the newspapers tell us.
It's a function of what the great writers, the great modern writers have shown us.
When I'm translating Homer, I've got the Greek with the commentary and the lexicons here.
And I have over here the Derek Walcott and the James Joyce and many other people I could mention.
And the job is to bring them both together 2,700 years apart as they are.
really you have these i mean i don't mean that i have the joy spread out in front of me or the derrick you're mindful it's in my head i spend about as much time reading modern english literature as i do reading ancient greek literature because i think it's a dual responsibility it's a pleasure but i think it's a professional necessity jimmy merrill said that any writer who does not read
fine modern writing is indulging in a high-risk activity.
And I think it's true.
One of the reviewers of the Odyssey suggests that the Odyssey has supplanted the Iliad in our times.
Do you agree with that?
Not for me it hasn't.
And I think especially in our time, coming out of the Cold War and the post-Cold War readjustments, I think the poem of wars is
has as much bearing on our sensibility as the poem of peace, so-called.
Remembering always that there are many tender moments in the Iliad, and there are many brutal moments in the Odyssey.
And suggesting that these are not brutal times is... Madness.
Or blindness, or both.
You can look at the news and look at these hearings going on in South Africa.
Absolutely.
It's a time of terrible massacre.
Sure.
And hopefully it's centuries, certainly, yes.
Absolutely.
Maybe the worst by far.
Amazing.
This is the Gary Wills piece, I guess I'm thinking of, The New Yorker.
And he's really taken by your attitude towards women.
Is this something, again, that you mindfully... I don't really think so.
I think it's in Homer.
Bernard Knox, who taught Gary Wills, Bernard...
former teacher and now collaborator in three books.
I love his book.
I started to find really a gift, and the privilege of working with that man now for three books is one of the great things this happened to me, and I thank my lucky stars for that.
And Bernard, who taught Gary Wills, said, he was very appreciative of the review and thought it very right, but did think, too, that Gary Wills might have known that, I better not say this,
Bernard has said that he'd been teaching the Odyssey that way since 1948, and I've been reading the Odyssey that way ever since I read it.
I don't mean that the great works of feminist criticism aren't of relevance, indeed they are, but I think it's a question of confirmation and mutual reinforcement, rather than of pointing out things that people who read Homer deeply have never seen before.
I don't mean to, and I won't, in my piece or in my book in any way, but it did seem that Wills is... And I like Wills.
Me too.
I respect Wills.
I have a great respect for him.
He's got a new book out now, and John Wayne went to heaven.
I know.
You know his book on the Gettysburg Address?
Oh, isn't that wonderful?
That's one of the great pieces of literary criticism we have.
In fact, when I did my interview with him, I bought that book.
Oh, great.
Yeah, it's a great book.
This is really a wonderful book.
He mentions, I guess, the thrust of that piece is a politically correct odyssey, you know.
You mean almost by calculation or something like that, or influence?
I think the thrust was, I think the subtext there was the classics are under attack.
And that this is the way to reinforce it.
And that maybe this is the way to retain relevance.
Right.
And, you know, I have to say, I went to a conference here in August, the Association of Literary Scholars.
Yeah, I'm a member of that.
I'll be going to their conference.
And I wonder, how do you feel, if you take your attention to another area, having the suggestion that a book has to be relevant to be read?
I have very mixed feelings about that.
On one hand...
A poem like The Odyssey is relevant.
Shakespeare is relevant.
At the same time, Shakespeare and Homer are infinitely larger than what is relevant to our time.
Maybe I can put it personally.
What drew me to translate The Odyssey, for instance, some of the powerful things, are personal points of reference.
Odysseus finding his mother dead in the underworld.
That was the first thing I translated.
When my mother died, I had to put together a service
20 years ago, I translated that the first time.
The reunion with Odysseus and his father in the orchard in the last book, it's a painful, tortured kind of relationship that has a lot of love and tenderness too.
I enjoyed and endured something of the same thing with my father.
The aspect of
coming of age, telematis, parenting, Odysseus and Penelope.
These are personal tugs, personal points of reference to draw me as they would draw anyone else into the poem.
Relevance.
But once you're in the poem, those things are expanded 10,000 times.
They become epic in their consequences.
They become memorable in the poetic expression which they achieve in ways that our own personal points of references
aren't necessarily day by day so if it's relevance that pulls you into the poem it's the spread of the poem the size of the poem that expands those personal points of reference a hundredfold beyond one's personal experience it's two things then in other words it's relevance on the one hand and great enlargement on the other how do you feel um if you don't mind my my going on i mean the poems
You speak quite eloquently.
I hope so.
I'm not going to embarrass you by asking point by point questions.
That's for me.
Go ahead.
I really much prefer the way we're going here.
What was the question I was just going to ask?
Do you think more relevant?
On the heels of relevance?
Yeah.
I was going off into something.
I'll come back to it for sure.
How do you feel when you hear that, for instance, you can get it from Amherst College two years ago.
graduated a student from Lauderdale in English.
This individual had never taken a course in Shakespeare or Spencer.
The fact that you can get a degree at some liberal arts institution without being expected to have graduated.
I've been concerned by such stories, and especially about a story involving Amherst, where I was a kid and went to college.
I got that story from Scott Thoreau, and I'm going to check it out, by the way, because it does seem rather incredible to me that they would graduate soon from Mali.
I'd like to ask a sneaky question, however.
Did that person not mean Shakespeare?
Do we know that?
You know what?
I'm going to find these things.
This is the journalist in me.
I think that they should be proud of their Sumer Mubarak graduates, and I would like to find the... I was one, and I would like to think of the next generation... And I would like to question him.
I believe that this is a him strategy, whether he or she.
I'd like to know.
I'm going to find out.
I guess what I'm... You know what I'm getting at.
I'd like to ask individual.
Yeah, exactly.
Please do.
Because what I'm getting at is this.
I was interviewed on the McNeil Lehrer program.
And this was just when that report was breaking, and I thought I might be asked a question about such things.
So I checked with some colleagues in the English department at Princeton, where I began.
You heard this story about Amherst, by the way?
I heard the story about Amherst.
The Times wrote these kinds of things up.
And so I asked a few people in the English department, just checking.
I used to be in the English department.
Shakespeare is not required in the Princeton English department.
Is Shakespeare taught?
Yes.
Is Shakespeare enrolled well?
Very well.
And enrollments are rising.
Is Homer required?
Not exactly.
Is Homer read?
Absolutely.
I just finished teaching a course to freshmen, ten of them, in the Iliad and the Odyssey.
What I'm getting at is something very simple, I think.
And I think Phyllis Franklin, the executive director of the MLA, said it best and first.
Something does not have to be required in order to be read.
These things, these Shakespeare, these Homers,
They're too good to go away.
Where I would really... Did you say that?
Yeah.
She said something to the effect that they don't have... Simply because something is not required... Seems to be the... That's right.
The target.
Simply because something is not required doesn't mean it's not being read.
It doesn't even mean it is not being taught in courses.
Where is she, by the way?
She's in New York City, and I don't know what the addresses are.
She's in New York, right?
Yeah, that's where the MLA has it.
She's located down there.
Yeah.
Phyllis Franklin, who's the executive director.
You ought to.
I think I have to do an interview with her.
She's a very intelligent woman.
Okay, I'm sorry.
Nothing.
I was just going to say that these things are too large, too old, too good just to go away.
I sense at my own university, at any rate, an increasing interest, not a decreasing interest.
There's a decrease in the number of times such things are required, but there's an increase in the general interest, the level of interest that they arouse.
I don't know if this is relevant here, but I did that with Neil Simon a few months ago in New York.
Lucky man.
Is he as funny in person?
He's nice, but he's not as funny in person.
But just nice.
It's thoroughly enjoyable.
First of all, he told me, I didn't use it in my column, but I certainly plan to use it in this textbook, because he said that there was a point a couple of years ago, living out on the West Coast, he thought he might like to teach for a year.
And so he contacted Stanford, and he said, you know, this is Neil Simon, would you be interested in my teaching a course in plane writing?
And they said, well, we'd love it, of course.
Are you kidding?
Absolutely.
And then they asked them, how many students do you think would take this course?
And they said, well, the fact is five.
They came back five students.
And they said, what if I would teach a course in script writing?
They said, off the charts, 250, 300.
Of course, I would take anything.
So would I. So would I. So would I. So would I.
I wonder what that says.
Well, it may say that the media are shifting.
I don't mean that this is a time or a culture in which people aren't reading.
God, look at the superstores.
Look at the results of the Iliad and the Odyssey, for that matter.
There's a lot of reading going on.
Isn't that amazing?
It is amazing.
It really is.
And it's reading among the lay public.
It's not a signed reading.
It's reading among the hungry lay public.
These are trade books.
These are trade books, and they're being sold by trade bookstores.
Which is wonderful, isn't it?
I think it's absolutely the most heartening thing you can imagine.
I was just publishing my book, by the way.
Yes, I know.
I had trouble with Random House and they had orphaned me because they didn't take my book for itself.
Misjudgment.
Don't you love it when they make mistakes like that?
But it's kind of a scholarly book and I had an opportunity to go to a wonderful university in Crest.
But I really did want to go to, I guess as a commercial motivation here, I'm a professional writer, but in much larger sense, you really want
the general public.
That must be very satisfying.
It's enormously satisfying because it means that people are reading not just for recreation but to recreate themselves in some way.
There's a real hunger for something they can sink their teeth into and suck some nourishment out of.
It's very heartening.
Now I did an interview with Harold Boomer.
And of course he's
He really fears that when teachers of his generation who are teaching Shakespeare and literature, teachers such as yourself, working with the classics, that when you're no longer on the scene, he just fears that you may not be replaced.
I'm not sure of that at all.
Not with that much reading going on.
I really mean it.
I think, too, that we ought to have a healthier regard for some of the shifts
in media.
I mean by that, The Odyssey is done on a wonderful audio book by Ian McKellen.
And he's a superb actor.
I saw him on Broadway doing Hamadeus.
He did do Hamadeus.
I saw it on Broadway.
It's going to be 20 years.
He'd be awfully good.
I'd like to see him in Hamadeus.
Well, that's caught on very briskly.
They're selling about one tape for every five books.
and the ratio usually goes 1 to 10 or 1 to 20.
This is part of, I think it's part of the Shakespeare revival, which is extraordinary.
It's part of the great cinematic revival of things like Shakespeare, Jane Austen, E.M.
Forster, Henry James, a variety of things.
In other words, it isn't simply a book culture.
It's a culture that has a lot to do, a lot of interest in performance,
a lot of interest in the visual, and we may have to shift our definitions of how, or our notions of how we approach classics, how we suck the nourishment out of them.
But first and foremost, they're books, and they enjoy a very wide currency.
Do you have a, that's a phrase, by the way, book culture, that's in a subtitle, Minus.
Oh, uh-huh.
And do you have a...
When you say book culture, what do you mean by that?
You know, I'm not sure anymore.
And when Penguin decided to put out tapes by Jacobi of the Iliad, I thought this would be maybe interesting, but I was really afraid that such things would cannibalize the book.
And I don't mean in terms of sales.
I mean that it would feel more to the ear than to the eye.
And then I caught myself, and I said, look, Homer was performed.
And if you don't have appetite for Homer in performance, you're not doing your job.
In fact, if your work in the name of Homer can't be performed, then there's something wrong.
And I've enjoyed readings.
I'm giving one tonight.
Is it here?
Yeah, it's at Harvard.
Is this something I could come to?
They're very snooty.
You have to be part of the Harvard community.
And I said, what does that mean?
I'm performing, I'm pretending I'm Homer, and a great actress, Catherine Walker, is Penelope, Athena, and Jason Robards is going to be... It's tonight?
It's tonight.
Can you possibly get in?
I'll show you.
I can get in if I could... If I could... Let me come in.
Can I give you a name and an address?
Sure.
This is all I've got.
I mean, there's a brand new one in Frankfurt, which we haven't heard anything about.
Maybe the most expensive one of all.
We have the brand new French library.
We have the brand new British library.
The Japanese are talking about a big library.
San Francisco, New York, just opened another PSIDL library.
All of this bears out what you and I are saying together.
We can do this.
Oh, yes, please.
I'll call this president.
I'll ask, you know, if it... This is the Harvard program, Learning from Performers.
And the executive director, the coordinator, is one Thomas Lee, L-E-E.
And this is the number.
I'll give it a shot.
Please give it a shot and say that we were talking.
Okay.
I guess this means telephone 617 or not.
617-495-8676.
Okay.
By all means.
What time is it?
It's 8 o'clock at the Agassiz Theatre.
If it's a problem, you know.
I always say you have to be a little bit pushy.
Push away, won't you?
I really mean that.
You can't make almost without breaking eggs, as they say.
I'm sorry.
Where were we?
Oh, we were talking about
the reading public, about the canon, about books, and book culture.
And I began by saying that I'm really not sure anymore.
I don't think it's just a question of people sitting in their private studies reading to themselves silently.
I think there comes upon us a whole performative aspect that we find in the audio book, in television, film adaptations, in musical scores.
In other words, I think there's a great expansion of how old masterpieces of print and word are being absorbed and received.
I don't think it's only books anymore, even though the efflorescence of libraries is something extraordinary.
Do you have any anxiety about the future of the book as we know it?
I don't think you can ever bank on anything, but I derive great heart
from the large bookstore, the proliferation of libraries, the amount of reading going on in the lay public, as you were saying.
With all of that happening, I worry less.
You know, I went up to a university.
I'm going, and my concluding section of this new book will be books and libraries and the future, everything that involves.
I'm just going where the stories are.
For instance, here at Harvard,
There's no such thing as a dead book at Harvard.
That's a matter of policy.
They have a depository out in South Florida where I've been.
It's like a valley of the kings where they put these books down.
And it's universities which are getting rid of books, which are the accessioning books, books that students haven't used in five or ten years.
But all of these are preserved in at least one copy.
Well, here they are.
But I mean, Cornell, for instance, is mandated to...
to cut their collection down to six million copies by the year 2000 and what do they do with the same person some they're they are digitizing and then and then and then disposing of the originals i've seen them do this so i'm not judging but you know this is it's a little like book burning it is isn't it and of course uh once you throw something away it is gone forever
I'm sorry to go off in these tendons.
That's all right.
Oh, yeah, but I... Now, two weeks, we're going to the Media Lab.
Have you ever heard of the MIT Media Lab?
But I've never been in it.
Okay, I'm going over it.
There's a fellow there that has a patent on something that looks like a book.
It will have pages that will appear to be paper, and you can load it with the Iliad or the Odyssey, and it will be...
to all intents and purposes, a book.
Is this something like a cybertext?
I can't.
I think all of these things are causes for alarm whenever books are destroyed, obviously.
I'm just talking about the extraordinary buoyancy, it seems to me, in the public imagination these days.
You know what thrills me?
22% of the American Booksellers Association figures of new books, of trade books sold, are children's books.
Say that again, what percentage?
22, by their recognition, of trade books.
Not of all books sold, but as general publishing, general trade publishing, I think it's up to 22%.
Children's books have never been more...
successful.
And you can imagine the number of those that are in effect performed, I mean by that parent leading the child.
Oh, indeed.
And that's interactive.
That's right.
I'll tell you, I think something else I derive art from, and it became a book too, is the television Civil War series, which I think was really a masterful job.
And certainly it had its visual impact, it had its musical impact.
But above all, it had its linguistic aspect, it seems to me.
That's where the power lay.
The power lay in the language, I think.
And the ability of qualified actors, qualified speakers to speak out that language.
Interestingly paired, too.
Morgan Freeman as Frederick Douglass, Sam Waterston as Lincoln, and so forth.
Arthur Miller as William Tecumseh Sherman.
Wonderful things, memorable things.
In other words, it was certainly a triumph of television, but it was a triumph of language without any doubt at all.
If we can continue this, it comes to showing Homer as a performer, as a vehicle for performance.
Very important to me.
And is this something you have always felt?
Always felt.
Ever since people taught me how to learn Greek.
Sorry, taught me how to speak, not speak Greek, but speak Homer's lines.
Ever since I began to read the Odyssey itself and those scenes in which gods perform in public, this seems to me to be a public activity, a performing activity.
It's not something that we should just be reading, in other words.
We should be hearing, if only in our inner ear.
Pope said this best.
He said, Homer makes us hearers, and Virgil leaves us readers.
Homer makes us hearers, H-E-A-R, and Virgil leaves us.
See, that's Pope's peril of them.
Homer makes us hearers, Virgil leaves us readers.
This was Pope?
Yeah, in his preface to the Iliad translation.
In his preface, because I might want to... I'm also going to have a chapter on reading.
marginal notes.
You know, there's a fellow right here at Harvard, Owen Gingrich.
Have you ever heard of him?
Yes, I have.
The great Copernicus, Chase.
He spent 25 years trying to track down every first and second edition in the world, and I think he succeeded, of Copernicus.
And then to study the marginalia, and to determine who the owners of these books were, but particularly the first owners.
because it has been suggested by some, which he's tried, which he has refuted, that this is the greatest book he ever read.
And, of course, it's proven quite the other way.
But, again, it goes back to the book as something more than just paper.
One of my favorite anecdotes along this line is I had an older colleague in the Princeton English Department who was a specialist in the manuscript tradition of Churchill's famous teachers.
And somewhere in the famous blood, sweat, and tears speech, there's a marginal notation by Churchill that says, point weak, yell like hell.
Oh, thanks.
Really?
I love that.
That's wonderful.
Point weak, yell like hell.
That's great.
How about translations that you're thinking about working on now?
What's next for you?
I don't know.
And I've been hanging out in Homer for 20 years.
And I'm weary and suffering from word overload.
But I'm also bereft.
That companionship is still with me, but it's not something I confront necessarily every morning that I wake.
And I don't really know where to turn.
Is it the companionship of Homer or the companionship of the text?
All those things.
I don't mean to be mawkish, but there's a great loneliness that sweeps over me.
which my wife knows all about.
Do you see him as a blind person?
I know it's kind of one of these apocryphal tales.
It's apocryphal and compelling, that he should be blind, yet have so much insight, that kind of paradox.
It is... Probably.
We don't know where he was born, but seven cities claimed him as their son.
We don't know what his name meant, either, Homeros.
captive.
Was he a captive of the wars or was he a knockabout and a drifter and a performer and therefore dependent on and even hostage to the kindness of strangers?
I don't know.
How personally did you come to Greek?
That's not difficult for me to place.
I was at Amherst College and we were being taught these great things in translation, great translations, Lattimore's largely, and
And it just seemed like the best literature around.
And I wanted to learn the language.
I liked the teaching.
The teachers were awfully good, too.
The literature was good.
The teachers were good.
And many friends had gone to Greek.
And so I began myself.
Late.
But I began with what Vinnie Lombardi would call desire.
That's great.
Anthony Grafton, of course, is down at Princeton at least.
Remarkable.
And I attended his talk at... If he's coming up here, I hope he's going back to Princeton, Harvard, and trying to get his hooks in the entire world.
Yeah, and I know Roger introduced and Roger started at the Graphical Society, which I attended his talk.
Marvelous.
Oh, he's terrific.
In fact, I'm going to interview him for this new book.
Good.
He's a brilliant guy.
He's just brilliant.
He's kind of all kinds of insights.
Yes.
You teach the classics?
Classics are part of every course I teach.
I teach essentially a course in the epic and a course in tragedy.
And in those courses, the first third is invariably Greek.
Then I go to, in the tragedy course that I'm doing now, a third Shakespeare and a third things modern.
So it's, in many ways, I'm teaching the classical tradition in later English and European letters.
And these are graduate courses or undergraduate courses?
Depends.
Right now I'm teaching a graduate seminar, but either course can go to undergraduates or to graduates.
And they're well attended, I try.
Yeah, they are pretty well attended.
They are.
There was a study commissioned by Dr. Gloria Nebron, which I really wanted to see, about the New York Times.
I'm going to try and get it next week.
What students read today?
You mean just in their spare time?
What they read in their spare time.
Well, I was interested to see the list, the ranked list published by the Princeton University store that has a good stock.
It was the Odyssey, first and foremost.
Call them.
I don't have your number on me, but if you... It's the Princeton University store, which is a major book outlet for students.
and this was a list they published a month or so ago, ask for Charlie Harlick and say that you and I were talking.
Okay.
H-A-R?
I think it's H-A-R-L-E-C-K, but I'm not sure.
Okay, that's fine.
I'm very better at getting it.
What's your time constraint, by the way?
I'm going to be interviewed by Christopher Lydon, whom I don't know at all.
On the radio.
On the connection?
On the connection.
What time is that?
And I should be there around 10.30.
Are you driving?
I'm going to take a cab.
Okay.
If you'd like, I'll be happy to drive you.
Are you sure?
I'm right out here on the street.
Okay.
You don't mind that?
No?
You're going that way?
Actually, let me backtrack, please.
I was going to go over to Widener.
Do it.
There's a cab right out there.
Don't bother.
If you don't mind, because actually I was going to go there.
I have to go by an arena's ticket at Widener.
You might, in fact, at the office of that, learning from performances on Mount Auburn Street.
We'll give you the address.
You're probably going to walk right by it.
Okay.
Maybe you can go in and strong-arm the guy.
I'm right out there.
Their address is, which is right down where Pangloss is today, 74 Mount Auburn.
Okay, good.
Excellent.
Well, actually, if you're going over...
This is the connection, the Homer connection, the connection to the Iliad and the Odyssey.
Flashback 3,000 years to the Eastern Mediterranean, the Trojan Wars are just over.
Troy is a smoking ruin.
The wily tactician Odysseus, who won it for the Greeks, is heading home a long way, as it turns out.
This is the way the story for the ages begins in Robert Fayette's new translation and version of Ian McKellen's reading of the Odyssey.
Sing to me of the man who used, the man of twists and turns, driven time and again off course once he hath plundered the hallowed heights of Troy.
Many cities of men he saw and learned their minds.
Many pains he suffered hardship on the open sea, fighting to save his life and bring his comrades home.
But he could not save them from disaster hard as he strove.
The recklessness of their own ways destroyed them all.
The blind fools they devoured, the cattle of the sun, and the sun god blotted out the day of their return.
Watch out on his story, Muse, Daughter of Zeus.
Starts from where you will.
Sing for our time, too.
Our guest this hour is a very American poet and translator, Robert Fagles, who has done for the Odyssey now what he did for the Iliad seven years ago.
He has recomposed it in modern English, in music, swift power in lines, in language not to be read so much as to be performed.
Translations are like performances, Robert Fagles has said, and all the great old epics and those parts of Achilles and Hector, Athena and Odysseus and all the rest have to be regularly recast.
Robert Fagles is in a sense the point man for our time of a recasting and huge revival of interest in these ancient stories, in this case the story
of the wandering mastermind Odysseus.
The story of the goddess Calypso who holds him captive and wants to make him a god.
The story of Zeus and Simon who keep tossing Odysseus out.
The story of his weighty wife Penalope who undoes her weaving every night to keep from finishing it because when it's finished she must give up Odysseus for dead and take over Zeus for her husband.
It's the story also of the torment of some telemarchus fidgeting at home
Who would you cast to play Odysseus in the TV series?
Would you let the Disney animators have that the Odyssey?
Seriously, do any of us really know the power of these stories in our culture and in all of our heads?
And do we accept that call?
Give Robert Fulton Bagels a call on the Odyssey Connection.
The phone is 1-800-3255.
Good morning to you.
Yesterday we were talking about George Washington, and it was hard enough to sort of present the father of this country in a sort of PC culture, slaveholder, warrior against the Indians, and that kind of thing.
How do we introduce the father of our culture?
Odysseus is, in a sense, in a PC world, this guy was not only a chauvinist, a warrior, a pirate in a certain way, not to mention a patriarch.
I mean, can we bear it?
Can we handle this guy?
I don't know whether we can handle it or not, but I think we have to bear him.
And what I mean by that is that we shouldn't be too pious about the origins of our culture.
We may look back there and find kinds of savagery, kinds of deviousness of character, kinds of complexity that we never even dreamed of.
Because in addition to us being a wily and tactical fighter, a man with a lot of bloodlust, he's also a man with a lot of tenderness, a man with a lot of social responsibility.
A good father, finally a good husband, and a very good son himself.
In other words, it's a poet
that you want to be PC about, and it's a poem about family values.
But it's a family that has its abrasions, its distance, its heartbreak, as well as its deep affiliations.
Part of the thrill is to realize all that incredibly complex, the complexity of it, the contradictions of it, and the reality of it.
I mean, it's all kind of wonderful.
I think so.
It's kind of wonderful, and it can be read at any stage of our lives.
It will hit us in a different way, from being children to adolescents.
Young, married people, middle-aged people, people on the way out.
Before we get into the story, and back to this man, I wonder if you'd just give us the sound of the Greek.
We hear the sound of your English.
been working from all these years.
Would you give us the sound of it as you imagine Homer told this tale?
Well, this is a series of educated guesses, but this is something, what it's like, what it sounds.
Andromoyere mamusa, polutropon hosmala pola, plongteapey troyes, hieron toliathrona persa, polondantropon, iranastia kainoane klo, polodogem panto, apenalkia von
It sounds great.
There are two things we're going to talk about.
We're going to talk about this story, and all the stories in it, but then also the character.
Odysseus himself.
I was just reminding myself in recent days reading it that Odysseus renamed Ulysses.
He's a major character in Dante's Defiant Comedy.
He's a villain.
He's a bad guy.
He's shouting away there on the lower surface of hell.
He was a trickster.
He was untrue fundamentally.
And he's restored in Tennyson's poem under Odysseus in a way that
also has to be dealt with.
He is the modern seeker.
He's also the emblem of Kennedy politics, and we'll come back to that too.
connection listeners to consider who you're tasked to play Odysseus.
Well, you know, he's been cast, don't you, in a television series that's coming up?
No.
Let me guess.
Bill Gibson.
Guess again.
Harrison Ford.
Again.
Kenneth Branagh.
Sean Connery of 20 years ago.
All of these are wonderful suggestions.
How would you like Armand Asante?
Don't know Armand Asante.
The last time you saw him was on HBO playing John Gotti.
Interesting.
Jack Palance, I think, would have been good, again, 20, 30 years ago.
Yes, but you see, Palance, only in those moments when the Odysseus is using poisoned arrows or being especially cruel, being especially sardonic.
My question would be if Palin's how much tenderness does he have?
How much of a loyal husband does he have?
He's got the abs.
He's got the back.
Because he can do one-arm push-ups at the age of I don't know what.
He might take the part yet.
No, but seriously, these are important roles, and I hope people will have suggestions.
I also want to tell you who's going to play him this afternoon, or rather this evening, at the Agassi Theater, Jason Robards.
And that should be something very interesting to hear.
Great voice, but he can't do push-ups with one hand.
Here's a connection, too.
Camille Paglia was here last week, and she's deep into this sort of stuff.
I mean, she says many wonderful things about Homer, but among other things she says about the Odyssey, this is for the distaffs.
Connection listeners.
The masculine glamour of the Iliad is gone.
When we first see the hero of the Odyssey, he is weeping.
The ruling virtues of this poem are female perception and endurance rather than aggressive action.
This is the woman's
Lucy.
I like that very much, but I don't think it's exclusively the woman's book.
I think that what we have to keep in mind is that women are given equal time with men, equal impressively, equal power.
But I don't think it's a poem lacking in masculinity either.
It's a wonderfully androgynous kind of poem, where Fielding called The Eating Ethic, I'd like to think of it as the most married poem we have.
This is all interesting.
I mean, you talk about androgynous.
Athena comes in and out of the story, the goddess, sometimes as a man, sometimes as a woman.
All the female roles are critically important.
Go back, though, to the central figure of Odysseus, and I ask the question who would play him, not quite widely or mysteriously.
I mean, the role is so
subtle uh and so multiple really uh what would you have to if you were directing this as a movie uh what would you be telling your actor i would tell my actor first and foremost to listen to the tapes with which we began because i think that ian mckellen presents the whole range of that character in a kind of brilliant way i think that's one of the best uh
The best ways to cast this poem, I'd like to see Ian McKellen play him, in fact.
If he cannot do that, I'd like to see him direct some other actor in it.
But what would you be telling him about the ranges of this guy?
I mean, for example, this is a man who has to shoot all the suitors, kill them all, when he comes back home, bloodthirstily, absolutely triumphantly, as sort of a physical exploit.
And then he's got to have this unbelievably tender reunion with his wife.
He's got to convince his wife
that in fact he is who he is, and then they've got to disappear back to the telltale bed and make love.
I mean, this is...
This is a big assignment.
This is an enormous assignment.
Pound was fond of saying or suggesting in the ABCs of reading that Bach and Homer are the only two places where you can get it all, meaning all of human experience.
Isn't that amazing?
I thought that was my thought, seriously.
Yes, I think that, well, take it, because it's certainly an awfully good one.
I've been seeing around here, Jan-Sbastien Roth,
We had no music before him and none after him.
We had plenty for all nations of all time.
And at the same time, Hallmark was exactly the same way.
Gary Lewis had that wonderful quotation from G.K.
Chesterton on Sunday.
Chesterton saying that for expressing the depth of the human spirit, the last man alive could do no better than to quote the Iliad and die.
This is enough.
This is enough for all time.
Precisely so.
Do you know the anecdote about Joyce and Frank Budgen?
No.
Joyce first conceiving of Ulysses, or a figure to copy from, imitate from great literature.
And he asked Budgen, who's the most complete man, you know?
And Budgen, the artist,
I asked, do you mean complete in the sense of sculpture, seen every which way, or complete in the sense of his character all around?
And Joyce said, I mean both.
Seen from all sides, and a man who has every facet in him.
That's what you would have to convey in the character of Odysseus.
Everything going from savagery to civilization.
Everything from deviousness to a kind of inwardness of the heart.
Quite extraordinary.
There's no emotional note that's not sounded in that character.
And no emotional note that's not answered in the person of his wife, Penelope.
It's a remarkable value.
He's also created a character that other great artists and poets could sort of work with all the time.
I want to go back to the Tennyson form of Ulysses.
And again, this resonates because it figures in Robert Kennedy's speeches after John Kennedy was dead.
And it's the model of
Odysseus or Ulysses as the first kind of explorer, the first a crutch for Columbus, the first scientist, the first everything, the first American, the first guy to head west, the first frontiersman.
But he says in the poem, in Tennyson's poem, Ulysses, and this is Ulysses speaking, he says, I cannot rest from travel.
I will drink life to the leaves.
I've forgotten who said that.
We'll drink life to the leaves.
But at the end, he says, and this is the sort of the Kennedy part, he says, come, my friends, tis not too late to seek a newer world.
Though much is taken, much abides.
And though we are not now that strength which in old days moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are one equal temper of heroic hearts,
made weak by time and fate, but strong in will to strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.
Wonderful sense of indomitability, isn't it?
The world before you, yes.
And Odysseus before that.
Robert Fagel is the translator who has remapped, retold, retuned this story in modern English.
And it's part, not only it's the sequel to his magnificent translation of the Iliad, but it's part of a very broad and interesting recolonizing of this whole story.
3,000 years old, this story, and as vital today as it ever was.
Still, the question in connection is, who would you let play the part in the TV series?
1-800-423-8255.
Betty is calling from Medford, Massachusetts.
Hi.
Good morning, Betty.
Hello.
Good morning.
First of all, I wanted to say that I've been teaching high school for a few years, and we do the Odyssey as part of our required reading, and students love it.
They respond in so many different ways, and I have the most interesting discussions
or offshoots of the actual content with the Odyssey more than any other piece of literature.
Betty, be specific about the reactions, what they say, what they do, what they draw, how they act.
Well, we talk a lot about what's a hero.
You know, yesterday you had that conversation about George Washington and about his flaws.
And I think most of the time, the good thing about the Odyssey is you can come to the conclusion that someone can be a hero and admirable and be flawed.
That's fine.
Yeah.
I agree with that.
But I did have a question, because one of the things we did talk about, there's two issues.
We use an abridged version in our anthology.
More and more, I team teach with a gentleman.
He brings in Fitzgerald's translation.
It is a beauty.
Yeah.
Well, you know, I saw...
The other thing is we do talk a lot about whether Odysseus is a good leader of men.
He seems to make a lot
Sometimes he's brilliant, and other times I'm thinking, for example, why can't he persuade his men at Ismaris to get on the boat and leave?
Why do they disobey him sometimes?
Good question.
I think the only answer is that they're a greedy bunch of pirates in their own way.
Maybe one of the questions ought to be, does he learn through his mistakes, or does he keep on making the same kind of mistake over and over again?
Well, yeah, that's another question.
We take a look at opening his big mouth when the polytheem is nice and bad.
That's right.
He does it once and the price is very high.
I'm not sure he does it again.
That would be my point.
Yeah, maybe not.
You're a good teacher.
That's clear.
I'm just thinking as you speak about that thing, what about Ross Perot to play Ulysses?
Oh, no.
If I had to pick somebody, I don't think physically he's right, but the cleverness and the... But he got his guys out of the run.
Huh?
He did get his guys out of the run.
Well, I think his guys got his guys out of the run.
Ulysses is also having a profession to be solid.
Cleverness.
Pardon me?
Say it again, Betty.
I like Kevin Kline's cleverness.
That's a nice thought.
He's a fine actor.
He's an underrated actor.
Kevin Kline.
What about Kevin Costner after Waterworld?
He's too Gary Cooper-ish.
Maybe he's not good enough with language.
You've got to speak.
You've got to speak with a full range of tone.
I think Kevin Kline can do that.
I'm not sure about Kevin Costner.
Betty, thank you.
1-800-423-8255.
Betty, seriously, hats off.
That's the work of the Lord to teach.
Indeed it is.
It's the way you do it.
Bravo.
1-800-423-8255.
Melinda is calling from Providence, Rhode Island.
Hi.
Morning, hello.
How about Patrick Stewart?
Patrick Stewart's wonderful.
And in fact, Patrick Stewart was one of the first persons we thought of as the reader.
Patrick Stewart had one too many movie contracts.
Yeah.
Well, he's always leading some sort of ship.
Yes, he is.
Exactly so.
The mariner.
The ship guy.
I have to admit, I haven't read the Odyssey.
However, my experience with the Iliad is from your Ian McKellen, the translation, the book on tape.
And although I'm not that familiar with Greek mythology, after listening to it, my whole family listened to it in the car on trips.
I'm just completely hooked.
And after that, I really wanted to find out more about the Odyssey.
And the reason I like this story is because I think it was a woman, I saw this sort of personification of...
human frailty in the men.
And what I saw in Odysseus was sort of this, the voice of reason, if you will, amidst a lot of the rage and egos and jealousy and all those things that were going on between the gods and the people and everybody.
Okay, we're going to go to the other side now.
Put the radio right back on.
I'm thinking about Patrick's...